Ruby Profiler beta (#10533)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/tracing/profiler/getting_started.md

[6]: /tracing/visualization/#services
[7]: /tracing/guide/setting_primary_tags_to_scope/#environment
{{< /programming-lang >}}
{{< programming-lang lang="ruby" >}}

<div class="alert alert-warning">

> Datadog Ruby Profiler is currently in public beta. We strongly advise evaluating the profiler in a non-sensitive environment before deploying in production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Datadog Ruby Profiler is currently in public beta. Datadog recommends evaluating the profiler in a non-sensitive environment before deploying in production.
```

</div>

The Datadog Profiler requires MRI Ruby 2.1+. **Wall time profiling is available for users on every platform (including macOS and Windows), but CPU time profiles are currently only available on Linux platforms**. To begin profiling applications:

1. If you are already using Datadog, upgrade your agent to version [7.20.2][1]+ or [6.20.2][1]+.

2. Add the `ddtrace` and `google-protobuf` gems to your `Gemfile` or `gems.rb` file:

    ```ruby
    gem 'ddtrace'
    gem 'google-protobuf', '~> 3.0'
    ```

    **Note**: Profiler is available in the `ddtrace` library for versions 0.49+.

> 2. Install the gems with `bundle install`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Install the gems with `bundle install`.
```

[7]: /tracing/guide/setting_primary_tags_to_scope/#environment
{{< /programming-lang >}}
{{< programming-lang lang="ruby" >}}

<div class="alert alert-warning">
Datadog Ruby Profiler is currently in public beta. We strongly advise evaluating the profiler in a non-sensitive environment before deploying in production.
</div>

The Datadog Profiler requires MRI Ruby 2.1+ and CPU-time profiles are only available on Linux platforms. To begin profiling applications:

1. If you are already using Datadog, upgrade your agent to version [7.20.2][1]+ or [6.20.2][1]+.

2. Add the `ddtrace` and `google-protobuf` gems to your `Gemfile` or `gems.rb` file:

    ```ruby
    gem 'ddtrace'
    gem 'google-protobuf', '~> 3.0'
    ```

    **Note**: Profiler is available in the `ddtrace` library for versions 0.49+.

2. Install the gems with `bundle install`

3. You can auto-enable the profiler by setting the `DD_PROFILING_ENABLED` environment variable to `true`:

    ```shell
    DD_PROFILING_ENABLED=true
    ```

    **Note**

    You can also configure the profiler via code. Rails applications you can create a `config/initializers/datadog.rb` file with Profiling enabled:

>     ```ruby
>     Datadog.configure do |c|
> 
>       # This will enable the profiler
>       c.profiling.enabled = true
>     end
>     ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    ```ruby
    Datadog.configure do |c|
      c.profiling.enabled = true
    end
    ```
```

(Small cleanup)

[6]: /tracing/visualization/#services
[7]: /tracing/guide/setting_primary_tags_to_scope/#environment
{{< /programming-lang >}}
{{< programming-lang lang="ruby" >}}

<div class="alert alert-warning">
Datadog Ruby Profiler is currently in public beta. We strongly advise evaluating the profiler in a non-sensitive environment before deploying in production.
</div>

The Datadog Profiler requires MRI Ruby 2.1+. **Wall time profiling is available for users on every platform (including macOS and Windows), but CPU time profiles are currently only available on Linux platforms**. To begin profiling applications:

1. If you are already using Datadog, upgrade your agent to version [7.20.2][1]+ or [6.20.2][1]+.

2. Add the `ddtrace` and `google-protobuf` gems to your `Gemfile` or `gems.rb` file:

    ```ruby
    gem 'ddtrace'
    gem 'google-protobuf', '~> 3.0'
    ```

    **Note**: Profiler is available in the `ddtrace` library for versions 0.49+.

2. Install the gems with `bundle install`

3. You can auto-enable the profiler with environment variables:

    ```shell
    DD_PROFILING_ENABLED=true
    DD_ENV=prod
    DD_SERVICE=my-web-app
    DD_VERSION=1.0.3
    ```

    or in code:

>     ```ruby
>     Datadog.configure do |c|
> 
>       # This will enable the profiler
>       c.profiling.enabled = true
>       c.profiling.enabled = true

Reviewer 2: Duplicated :)

```suggestion
    ```ruby
    Datadog.configure do |c|
      # This will enable the profiler
      c.profiling.enabled = true
```

[6]: /tracing/visualization/#services
[7]: /tracing/guide/setting_primary_tags_to_scope/#environment
{{< /programming-lang >}}
{{< programming-lang lang="ruby" >}}

<div class="alert alert-warning">
Datadog Ruby Profiler is currently in public beta. We strongly advise evaluating the profiler in a non-sensitive environment before deploying in production.
</div>

The Datadog Profiler requires Ruby 2.1+. To begin profiling applications:

> 1. If you are already using Datadog, upgrade your agent to version [7.20.2][1]+ or [6.20.2][1]+.

Reviewer 2: In the Python docs, we list that CPU-time profiling only works "on POSIX platforms". For Ruby, the CPU-time profiler only currently works on Linux -- do you think it's worth calling that out here?

2. Add the `google-protobuf` and `ddtrace` gems to your Gemfile:

    ```ruby
    source 'https://rubygems.org'
    gem 'ddtrace'
    gem 'google-protobuf'
    ```

    **Note**: Profiler is available in the `ddtrace` library for versions 0.49+.

2. Install the gems with `bundle install`

3. You can auto-enable the profiler by simply setting `DD_PROFILING_ENABLED` environment variable to `true`:

    ```shell
    DD_PROFILING_ENABLED=true
    ```

    **Note**

    You can also configure the profiler via code. Rails applications you can create a `config/initializers/datadog.rb` file with Profiling enabled:

    ```ruby
    Datadog.configure do |c|
      # Example for Rails: following will activate tracing auto-instrumentation

>       c.use :rails

Author: Got it, will do

    end
    ```

4. Start your Ruby application with a pre-loader:

    ```
    bundle exec ddtracerb exec <your_app_invocation>
    ```

    **Note**

    If starting the application via `ddtracerb exec` is not an option (eg. when using the Phusion Passenger web server), you can alternatively start the profiler by adding the following to your application entry point such as `config.ru` for a web application:

    ```
    require 'ddtrace/profiling/preload'
    ```

4. After a minute or two of starting your Ruby application, visualize your profiles in the [Datadog APM > Profiler page][2].

**Note**:

- It is strongly recommended to add tags like `service` or `version` as it provides the ability to slice and dice your profiles across these dimensions, enhancing your overall product experience. Use environment variables to set the parameters:

| Environment variable                             | Type          | Description                                                                                      |
| ------------------------------------------------ | ------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |

> | `DD_PROFILING_ENABLED`                           | Boolean       | Set to `true` to enable profiler. Supported from tracer version 0.45+.              |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `DD_PROFILING_ENABLED`                           | Boolean       | Set to `true` to enable profiler. Supported from tracer version 0.48+.              |
```

Author: Copy pasta from Python exposed :)

| `DD_SERVICE`                                     | String        | The Datadog [service][3] name.     |
| `DD_ENV`                                         | String        | The Datadog [environment][4] name, for example, `production`. |
| `DD_VERSION`                                     | String        | The version of your application.                             |

> | `DD_TAGS`                                        | String        | Tags to apply to an uploaded profile. Must be a list of `<key>:<value>` separated by commas such as: `layer:api,team:intake`.   |

Reviewer 2: This is not yet supported, see https://datadoghq.atlassian.net/browse/PROF-3320 . Should we remove it from this list, or maybe keep it and add a "currently not supported" note?

Author: Got it, will update

[6]: /tracing/visualization/#services
[7]: /tracing/guide/setting_primary_tags_to_scope/#environment
{{< /programming-lang >}}
{{< programming-lang lang="ruby" >}}

<div class="alert alert-warning">
Datadog Ruby Profiler is currently in public beta. We strongly advise evaluating the profiler in a non-sensitive environment before deploying in production.
</div>

> The Datadog Profiler requires MRI Ruby 2.1+ and **CPU-time profiles are only available on Linux platforms**. To begin profiling applications:

Reviewer 3: Not obvious if there are other things that will work on non-linux platforms.

Reviewer 2: I think this was also reflected on Marco's feedback. Perhaps we should state here what users should expect on other platforms, e.g.

> The Datadog Profiler requires MRI Ruby 2.1+. Wall time profiling is available for users on every platform (including macOS and Windows), but CPU-time profiles are currently only available on Linux platforms.

Reviewer 2: I've also created https://github.com/DataDog/dd-trace-rb/pull/1517 to improve the message we log to the console to include this "...but this is what you should expect" addendum as well.

1. If you are already using Datadog, upgrade your agent to version [7.20.2][1]+ or [6.20.2][1]+.

2. Add the `ddtrace` and `google-protobuf` gems to your `Gemfile` or `gems.rb` file:

    ```ruby
    gem 'ddtrace'
    gem 'google-protobuf', '~> 3.0'
    ```

    **Note**: Profiler is available in the `ddtrace` library for versions 0.49+.

2. Install the gems with `bundle install`

> 3. You can auto-enable the profiler by setting the `DD_PROFILING_ENABLED` environment variable to `true`:

Reviewer 3: IMO bullet 3 should be structured something like

> 3. You can configure the profiler with environment variables:
> ```sh
> DD_PROFILING_ENABLED=true
> DD_ENV=prod
> DD_SERVICE=my-web-app
> DD_VERSION=1.0.3
> ```
> or in code:
> ```ruby
> Datadog.configure do |c|
>    ...
> end
> ```
> In a Rails application, you could put the code config block in `config/initializers/datadog.rb`.

Note: no backslashes after env vars since this isn't a full command; they make sense to have if we put the command to run in the same code block.

    ```shell
    DD_PROFILING_ENABLED=true \
    DD_ENV=prod \
    DD_SERVICE=my-web-app \
    DD_VERSION=1.0.3
    ```

    **Note**

>     You can also configure the profiler via code. Rails applications you can create a `config/initializers/datadog.rb` file with Profiling enabled:

Reviewer 3: Broken sentence.

    ```ruby
    Datadog.configure do |c|

      # This will enable the profiler
      c.profiling.enabled = true
    end
    ```

4. Add the `ddtracerb exec` command to your Ruby application start command:

    ```shell
    bundle exec ddtracerb exec ruby myapp.rb
    ```

    Rails example:

    ```shell
    bundle exec ddtracerb exec bin/rails s
    ```

    **Note**

    If starting the application via `ddtracerb exec` is not an option (eg. when using the Phusion Passenger web server), you can alternatively start the profiler by adding the following to your application entry point such as `config.ru` for a web application:

    ```ruby
    require 'ddtrace/profiling/preload'
    ```

> 4. After a minute or two of starting your Ruby application, visualize your profiles in the [Datadog APM > Profiler page][2].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. A minute or two after starting your Ruby application, your profiles will show up on the [Datadog APM > Profiler page][2].
```

> **Note**:

Reviewer 3: I don't think we need this whole note section anymore; all the content is already covered above.
